Campbell, I'm chairing the subcommittee
of the Health Select Committee.
Um, we do have your, your written submission, um,
and we have allocated 10 minutes for your oral submission.
Um, you can use, um, that 10 minutes a a as you like.
We have various members of
the Health Select Committee online.
We also have officials online, uh, documenting as well.
So I'll hand that time over to you now,
UA Rachel ua.
Um, next to me is, um, Graham Young,
who will be speaking on our behalf today for Kiara.
Oh Kiara. Everybody, um, Morena, um,
Nati Uri welcomes the opportunity
to make a submission on the Healthy Futures
Paya Amendment Bill.
We acknowledge the intention of the bill
to improve effectiveness of health services
and the delivery of services to patients while not opposed
to the intent of the Bill.
Nati nu strongly opposes changes,
which will undermine an equity driven approach
to ensure Maori can participate and receive treatment
and services within a health system
that reflects our needs rather than one
that reflects poor health indicators for Maori.
We say this from a point
of direct involvement with the health system.
Nati Rooney operates one
of the largest primary healthcare practices in taranaki,
providing GP care, outreach, clinical services,
and whanau Aura services, not only to our own population,
but to the wider community.
With 9,400 registered patients,
we see firsthand the impact of health equity concerns
of our people struggling to interconnect
with secondary care, which in turn impacts on
their health outcomes.
Equally, we see positive action in some areas like the
retention of comprehensive care funding, which is designed
to integrate whanau back into primary healthcare
and to prevent readmission to hospital care.
I think we all acknowledge that more needs to be done.
Perhaps the Y 2 5 7 5 tribunal report makes sober reading
in respect of Maori health
and some of the key issues
that they highlighted was systematic crown breaches.
The tribunal found
that the Crown has systematically breached its obligations
under rigi in the health sector failure
to protect Maori interests.
The report found the Crown had failed
to actively protect Maori interests
and interests, Maori rights, an interest particularly
regarding Maori led representation
and decision making in health
distortions in the health system.
The report identifies significant distortions in the
New Zealand health system impacting Maori health outcomes,
and more importantly, the importance
of Maori led health authority.
The tribunals suggested
that a Maori led health authorities crucial
for addressing the systematic issues
and improving health outcomes for Maori.
But we know we've already lost this.
Our significant concern is
that this bill looks like another attempt
to remove a clearly defined partnership approach,
recognizing Maori in terms of our rights and interests.
The changes set out in the bill are concerning in
that equity models
and partnership approaches are being replaced
with one size fits all approach.
This one size fits all model has failed
to deliver in the past.
It makes no sense to continue to reinforce this
through this bill.
We need enabling legislation
that creates equity driven solutions that deal
with practical barriers, which deal with the issues
of practical barriers, poor communication,
a hostile healthcare environment in some cases,
and primary healthcare barriers,
and in particular, racism that often exist
and that we confront.
It is considered that many Maori
and up to 44% have unmet health needs, um,
particularly in the primary health sector where we operate,
which is a woeful statistic.
The bill undermines all the good work in addressing the many
failures identified through the Y 2 5 7 5 claim
and makes, makes final changes
to extinguish a fresh approach,
which was envisaged in 2022 when the new health
system was enacted.
All our legislative backstops are now being dismantled
and diluted for what appears to be little
or no specific reason.
The bill does nothing
to achieve effective health services delivery to Maori.
The removal of the health sector principles goes
to the heart of an equity driven model,
and we oppose the removal,
and in particular, the principle
that states the health sector should be equitable,
which includes ensuring Maori
and other population groups have access to services
in positions for their health needs,
and to receive equitable levels of service
and achieve equitable health outcomes.
We are concerned that removal of the
above principle will impact upon how tofu order
delivers services for Maori.
There is no logic in respect of efficiency
and effectiveness to remove such important principles.
Given the overwhelming evidence that equity driven approach
that was set out in the 2 7 5 7 claim, the removal
of these principles will
by default maintain poor Maori statistics as proven
by the historical one size fits all model of outcome.
What is worrying is that this approach will eventually
negatively impact on the whole of society
and con continue
to take the health system further into crisis.
Nati strongly opposes the changes
to iwi Maori partnership boards.
These changes removes the ability
for Maori partnership boards to evaluate local health needs
and work directly with taura.
There will be a significant loss
of regional voice when setting COPA
and Maori investment opportunities
and determining which services need to be commissioned
to meet equitable outcomes for Maori.
Further, there will be an active loss
of connected collaboration in respect of information
and basic delivery of needs.
A new layered approaches being
proposed through these changes.
And we don't believe this is efficient or effective at all.
These changes take away the empowering local appointed iwi
Maori partnership boards to engage directly at regional
and community levels where real meaningful change can
occur and is occurring.
Understanding what needs to occur
to regional level will ensure far greater efficiencies in
the overall model of care provided.
Communities when communicated, uh, di uh, that communication
directly occurs with ura, not via another committee
and then another committee.
We consider the health strategies need strong
and empowered Maori health boards, uh,
Maori partnership boards.
Once again, there is no real analysis that we can see as to
what significant what significant efficiency
or streamlining will occur when the changes proposed, uh,
apart from continued disenfranchising of Maori, we consider
that no case has been made to enact the changes to the role
and functions of Maori partnership boards
that will really help deliver meaningful changes.
In fact, we believe the opposite will occur.
Nati Rooney considers this bill significantly undermines
and weakens the ability to achieve prevention
and population health strategies.
The strong focus on equity, which is being dismantled,
undermines our rights and interests,
and in particular, the ti rights
and interests that are so important
and so foundational for us.
There is no compelling evidence
that the changes proposed will create efficiencies
and effectiveness and systems and structures.
We seriously believe local voices will be lost
amongst the new cascade of layers of reporting.
We strongly recommend
that Iwi Maori partnership boards are retained
and that their status and direct interface
with TA Aura is reinforced.
We also strongly advocate for equity driven principles
to be preserved, which can only assist, uh,
creating a healthier, more empowered
population for everyone.
Only this position will ultimately deliver the efficiencies
and effectiveness of a well-functioning health system.
Thank you committee.
Excellent. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Graham and Rachel, do we have any questions
from the committee now?
We don't see any hands jumping up, Barb,
but once again, please don't take that as any, any sign.
Um, you have got a very, uh, concise
and precise written submission, um,
and we have had a chance to look through that
and really appreciate you highlighting issues
and your oral submission relating to that as well.
So thank you very much for, for taking the time to submit,
uh, to the Health Select Committee, um,
and your feedback has has been noted.
So thank thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Excellent. We'll now move to our next submitter, uh,
which is T Purna Aura.
Um, do we have them online? Excellent.
We have Ward Welcome Ward.
Uh, ward, if you could just unmute yourself and
I've just done that. Has it got me
now? Sorry.
Yep, that's, that's better. We just can't see you yet.
Okay. Let me just see if I can, oh, there
We go. Excellent. Good
to, good
to see you again, ward. How are you?
It's been Well.
Welcome to this subcommittee of the Health Study Committee.
Um, as you know, I'm Hamish Campbell.
We have various members online.
Uh, we also have, uh, officials, um, online as well.
Um, we have your written, written submission, um,
and we have allocated 10 minutes for your oral presentation.
Um, so I'll hand that time over to you. Now.
Look, uh, thank you Hamish, really appreciate that.
There's really nothing in the submission, um,
that shouldn't be self-evident in reading.
I've tried to structure in such a way that the front end is
for you, the committee to look at
and the rest of it's for the, uh, officials to wade
through if they so wish to do so.
We're in an interesting position as an IMPB at Han.
We obviously have some aspirations
and things that we'd like to achieve, uh,
in the Maori health space,
but equally understand that, you know,
that runs on the board is always what helps, uh,
with regards, um, getting traction,
particularly at the funding level.
One of the things that we've emphasized in here is
that we're not here to argue over whether we commission
it now or not.
Um, if the government has made its mind up
to go a certain route, we can certainly, uh, what we wish
to express that we are very keen to head
to the commissioning side, uh, of health here.
But in the meantime, uh, we've got a very internal focus.
We want to get our information gathered
'cause we're one of the last, uh, IBS to, to, uh,
come into being, uh,
and to make sure that we've got the right sort of data
and identification of, uh, services
that will make a substantial difference we hope
to the population of wa.
There are three major areas inside of the bill
that I just wanna draw the committee's attention to.
I think that no matter what, there should be an obligation
to speak to IMP Bs.
It becomes a pointless exercise
to have us if there's not at least
that underlying obligation, um, to talk.
Um, and, uh, um, I I would ask why, why that was, um,
not, uh, drafted more strongly.
Equally, um, decision making goes into HA, which I,
I have to admit, I'm a slightly bit perplexed by that.
It's not that I have any problem with the people on,
on H Mac, but you're asking them to consolidate 17
IBS and to advice that goes through
to the Ministry of Health.
And I think that's a rather large ask for a group of people
that are largely removed from the communities
that are making, uh, recommendations.
Again, I don't want it to be seen as a criticism
of the individuals on it, but rather in the process that's,
that's being outlined here.
And I just think that, um, over time,
and it lends into our, um, desire
to eventually move down that commissioning pathway.
Um, and the other one is around the realities.
Um, there is a talk of cultural safety and responsiveness.
I, I know those words can be triggered words at times,
but if we look underneath them
and actually understand what's what it's really about,
it's in the light in the case of say, uh, Martin Mu
and of Chatham Islands, you know,
we really are an extraordinarily remu remote, uh, community.
Um, what we talk about, uh, both in cultural safety
and responsiveness is the fact
that we have a very particular way of being, uh,
and a way of living over there.
That that's, um,
very much unlike anything else in the country.
So when we talk, use that language
to understand the remoteness, uh, of the Chatham Islands,
it starts to get a bit more clarity about what's really
meant, uh, with it.
We don't have immediate access to, uh, particularly
to secondary care, let alone tertiary.
And so, uh, a lot of what we do culturally is designed to,
uh, address those matters while we wait to get people off
to the hospitals, but more also in the areas
of mental health, uh, and, um, areas around diabetes
and lifestyle, uh, issues that we,
we certainly do face, uh, on the island.
Uh, I've already said that, you know, we do want
to be in a position to bid for commissioning status,
particularly given our remoteness.
And so I don't see any problem with adding a com a
part into the act
that at least enables a minister to make a decision.
Uh, if an IMPB has shown it has the ability capability, uh,
and the information
and data required to potentially get it to that point when,
when that might be, well, that's for the officials to decide
how that might work if a minister was
to indeed add this back into the pay order, uh, act.
And I think there just needs
to be specific recognition of the remoteness.
There are communities, not just the chathams,
but certainly we'd probably rated as one
of the most remote areas.
And there are realities that go with that
that perhaps could be missed out if it at least isn't
recognized inside the act.
Um, in such a way that that,
and if you, again, if you couple it with the need
to actually have the IMPB be consulted with upfront,
it may just assist in mitigating some of those remote,
the issues that come from being, uh,
a very remote community, uh, over in the chathams.
Look, we've no doubt got a wealth of things
that you need to be dealing with here.
And so I'm gonna leave it at that Hamish,
and if there's any questions, um,
I'm willing to take them now.
Excellent. Thank, thank you very much. And I do
acknowledge just the remoteness of the Chathams, um,
and I appreci appreciate your comments around that.
Do I, I don't see any hands up from, uh, the committee.
Oh, uh, Jenny's got a hand up. Jenny
Got Ward, lovely to see you.
Um, now in terms of the remoteness aspect of,
of the chathams and and healthcare, would you, um,
would it be, are you asking for specificity around
for your, um, area in particular?
Or are you talking about remoteness in terms
of maybe the far north or the west coast?
Are you looking purely for your area?
Um, 'cause it's geographical isolation.
If I, if, if I said no
and I was looking more specifically,
I probably wouldn't travel back to the Chatham Islands
because they really do want that recognition, um,
and the specificity around it.
But look, we're not the only one on the boat
of being a remote location.
Um, and even in the far north, um, you know,
the access to services is still limited.
It may still take hours to get, I mean, for us to get
a life flight out, you're probably talking about a 24 hour
turnaround to get somebody in.
And we've managed to, you know, achieve that.
We did have a terrible situation where one
of our whanau was bitten by a shark,
and unfortunately we just couldn't do anything.
And that person died on the island
last year, I think it was.
Um, but, but a number of us do face the, the remoteness
and it changes the way in which we think about the delivery
of health in those communities.
The chances of us getting a fully fledged, uh,
hospital are not particularly great all.
So what do we do then? What gets recognized inside the act
that enables some of those commissioning aspects
to occur on the island without the extraordinary expense
that goes with trying to put in a fully fledged, um,
secondary care place.
But we do have a clinic there
and just, you know, making sure
that we've got enough service in place
that we can effectively look
after people as we look to locate them back, um,
to the broader services available in a, in a Canterbury
or in a Wellington, uh, would be very useful.
And we'd really like that recognized than this, but,
but if I age any, it really goes to, um, that need
to be more consultative
and I think the act probably
needs to be beefed up a little bit.
And I've made specific recommendations on the submission.
Thank you. Thank, thank you very much
and thank you for your very thoughtful,
thoughtful submission.
Really do, do appreciate it.
Uh, we now, we now will move on to our next submitter,
which is Physiotherapy New Zealand.
Um, and I do believe we have Simon and Kirsten with us.
Yeah. Um, first of all, thanks for the opportunity of, uh,
of speaking today to the committee.
Um, yes, I'm Simon Hall.
I'm the CEO of Physiotherapy New Zealand.
Uh, and Simon here is Kirsten Davy,
who's our board chair and president.
And, uh, we represent over 4,000
physiotherapists across the tu.
Um, so, so overall PNZ supports improving the effectiveness
of health service delivery, um, more timely access
and also enabling public private partnerships.
And so our key message today is, um, the consideration
of fully utilizing the existing physio workforce
and national models of care so
that the bill can deliver on its intent around capacity,
around timeliness and around value.
Now we are really keen to push the move beyond medical
centric models, uh, which predominantly rely on GPS
and nurses, um,
because there's a wide allied health workforce
that are ready and waiting in particular physiotherapy, uh,
and physiotherapists who work across a variety
of clinical specialties.
So for example, physios are working in primary as well
as secondary and tertiary care.
So we think that to make primary care function better,
first contact physio, uh,
is an established model that works.
And we know that musculoskeletal presentations account
for up to 20% of a typical GPS workload
and that redirecting them
to physiotherapists in the community settings can improve
access, can reduce cost,
and freeze up GP time for more complex medical care.
And, and this is really, really important, particularly
for our more vulnerable communities, including Maori
and rural, uh, and those with disabilities as well.
Uh, so alongside primary care in the secondary care space,
health New Zealand already has an initiative underway
to reduce orthopedic wait times in secondary care, um,
by using physiotherapists for first specialist assessments.
Uh, and so fully funded end to end pathways,
including community triage, first specialist assessment
and rehabilitation would help
to substantially reduce orthopedic wait lists
and unblock the system.
And we know that something like 70% of people, um,
on wait lists may not require immediate specialist
involvement and that physios could be part of that solution.
But it's not just musculoskeletal presentations
where physios can provide solutions.
Uh, we have clinical specialties across, uh,
quite a broad range
of areas including cardiorespiratory physios
who work both pre and postoperatively.
So Prehabilitation reduces post-op complications,
it reduces length of stay, uh, and also readmissions.
So it's a really cost effective, um, option,
which is we think currently underutilized.
Um, cancer rehabilitation, another really interesting area.
Um, so embedding exercise based rehabilitation improves
function fatigue and return to work,
which are absolutely critical for survivorship.
Uh, I would also call out women's health.
So pre specialist assessment
and rehabilitation is a ready to roll template similar
to those musculoskeletal pathways
that I talked about earlier, earlier
that Health New Zealand already has underway.
And finally across community teams.
So comprehensive community based physiotherapy we know
lowers readmissions and supports timely discharge.
So really, really critical component there.
I'll just hand across to Kirsten now.
Physiotherapists are ready now with solutions.
We are a well qualified, we regulated, respected
and an available workforce across public
and private settings.
There are areas where physiotherapy,
public private partnerships are working well
already, such as this.
The musculoskeletal initiatives,
these should be expanded nationally across a variety
of health conditions to ensure improved access
to health services with reduced financial
drag for the sector.
Physiotherapists work seamlessly with primary care teams
and we refer into the secondary
and tertiary care areas only as needed.
This is a more cost effective pathway,
enabling better access to effective treatment
for people within their communities.
Physiotherapists can certainly help achieve the health
targets where experts in rehabilitation enabling timely
return to function and work, which reduces downstream costs.
If we look at emergency departments, we know
that acute musculoskeletal conditions account for around 20%
of people sitting and waiting in the ED departments.
Physiotherapists can support the shortest stays in ED target
through working in those departments
and ensuring people presenting with those musculoskeletal
and painful conditions are assessed
and discharged in a timely manner.
If we look at inpatient care, we know
that adequately resourcing
of inpatient physios can have a significant reduction in
hospital length of stay.
And examples where people with hi hip fractures,
if they're mobilized on day one, uh,
it results in them leaving hospital on
average two days earlier.
So it reduces the cost of their hospitals stay.
Um, and so that is obviously only able
to be achieved if there a physiotherapist
available to do that.
The bottom line is that physiotherapists are available.
These sorts of initiatives are immediately scalable
and will help, um, access, they'll help reduce wait times,
they'll help the hospital flow with that.
Right. Commissioning and funding from an
equity and I'm sorry.
Yeah, and so, so there's a few things for us in terms of
what needs to be in the bill.
Um, so firstly, we, we really humbly request, uh,
explicitly including Allied health
and in particular physiotherapy and national models of care
and commissioning guidance, not just medical nursing, um,
to also enable and expect Health New Zealand to partner
with both private
and community providers,
including in the rehabilitation space
and to also set targets that include rehabilitation.
So whether that's cancer care, cardio, respiratory,
other areas, um, it will be really powerful.
Um, we, we also just wanted to highlight,
we think there's a risk with repealing the health sector
principles and the New Zealand Health Charter in terms
of unintended consequences, uh, if we weaken the culture
of accountability and put, uh, outcomes at risk.
Um, so really that distribution of expertise and
and retention is a really challenge, uh,
that our members are, are already reporting.
Um, and so we recommend the bill retains
or replaces these with enforceable expectations
for supportive working culture, for manageable workloads
and rostering for safe physical demands
and ongoing professional development,
which are all determinants of greater,
better patient outcomes.
And just finally, physiotherapy,
New Zealand does support equitable service design
with strengthened iwi Maori roles.
We are concerned that timely access
for Maori could worsen if Allied Health is not
explicitly included.
Physiotherapy must be embedded in primary
and community models,
and we look forward to working alongside
our Maori providers.
So we ask the committee to direct Health New Zealand
to fully utilize physiotherapists
as first contact practitioners
and primary care for musculoskeletal conditions
and long-term conditions,
and expand that first specialist assessment pathways
and that type of initiative,
embedding rehabilitation targets into the models
of care such as cancer
and cardio, respiratory, women's health ed.
The list can go on
and on as to how we can assist, uh,
health New Zealand Commission community physiotherapy via
public private interface partnerships across the mall too,
uh, with funding to match the demand
and clear referral pathways, um, from GPS
and into ed resource inpatient physiotherapy.
So we can appropriately assist in reaching the health
targets and future health targets, obviously,
as well include rehabilitation spaces
and infrastructure programs within Health New Zealand.
And as Simon has just, uh, alluded to retaining
and strengthening the health sector principles in the
New Zealand charter to ensure, um,
health workforce wellbeing and accountability
and as I've just mentioned as well,
strengthening equity partnering with iwi Maori providers
and ensure timely access
to physiotherapy in Maori communities.
Kira, we are ready to help deliver capacity and timeliness.
Now, physiotherapists are there. We are shovel ready.
We are willing, um, to work with you
and, um, for the best, uh, for the New Zealand public.
We welcome your questions.
Excellent. Thank, thank you very much to the both of you.
Um, I don't see any hands up from,
from the committee at this stage, so I just,
that leads me just to thank you for, uh,
your written and oral submissions.
We really do appreciate, appreciate your feedback, um,
and the time you've taken to submit to the committee.
So thank, thank you very much. Um, thank you.
We now are scheduled to have a break, um, to one o'clock.
Um, so if, if members can be back uh, by one o'clock,
that'd be most appreciated.
So, uh, it's been a fairly full on morning.
Um, I appreciate,
I might have had the hours wrong when
I announced the last break.
Um, that's because it's probably been been a busy morning.
I.